# Testing the applicability of machine learning algorithms to examine benthic foraminiferal responses to multiple environmental parameters

## 1. Introduction:

In recent decades, anthropogenic activities have increasingly affected community structure of marine organisms including benthic foraminifera (e.g. Diaz and Rosenberg, 2008; Buskey et al., 2016). Benthic foraminifera, single-celled eukaryotes, are tiny organisms adapted to the benthic zone, and have been regarded as one of the most abundant and diverse group of eukaryotic organisms in marine ecosystems (e.g., Murray, 2006). Macrofauna have been widely used as the tool for monitoring marine environments (Borja et al., 2003; Bouchet and Sauriau, 2008), but benthic foraminifera represent an additional, sensitive and useful proxy of environmental changes due to high diversity, reduced size, sedentary lifestyle, exceptional abundance and short reproductive and life cycles (e.g. Frontalini and Coccioni, 2008). Thus, foraminiferal metrics are commonly applied to research focused on understanding of the effects of anthropogenic impact and stress on marine ecosystems in both marine and transitional marine settings (e.g. Alve, 1995; Francescangeli et al., 2016). Consequently, foraminiferal-based indices i.e. Exp(H'bc) (Bouchet et al., 2012), Foram Stress Index (Dimiza et al., 2016), Tolerant Species Index (Barras et al., 2014), Foram-AMBI (Alve et al., 2016; Jorissen et al., 2018; Bouchet et al., 2021) have been recently introduced as monitoring tools for evaluating the ecological quality status (EcoQS) of marine ecosystems. The application of these indices also potentially allow to reconstruct the paleo-EcoQS, to track its changes and to define the background reference conditions. The latter is of paramount importance, particularly in transitional and coastal environments, as it represents the reference level by which calculating the deviation of the EcoQS. Although numerous studies on benthic foraminifera as bio-indicators have been published, very few of these studies (e.g., Murray, 2001) have determined thresholds over which a parameter significantly induces changes on benthic foraminiferal assemblages, on species or on ecological indices. Since different environmental drivers act simultaneously and there are additive, synergistic, and antagonistic relationships among them in natural ecosystems, their disentanglement is a very difficult task that can be overcome by using laboratory experiments such as culture (e.g. Ciacci et al., 2019; Al-Enezi et al., 2020) and mesocosms (e.g. Frontalini et al., 2018a, b). More recently, the development of the novel machine learning approaches has offered the opportunity to disentangle effects of individual drivers and to effectively detect thresholds to be used for implementing conservation and management plans, and to set protective environmental standards (e.g. Large et al., 2015). Indeed, defining thresholds along physical and chemical gradients is particularly suitable for environmental management in order to predict sudden ecological changes, particularly in the case of continued degradation and/or restoration activities.
Gradient forest (Gf) and Random forest (Rf) modelling are machine learning methods that focus on ranking predictors of nonlinear responses of biota to environmental parameters (Elith and Leathwick, 2009). When these models are compared to any generalized linear model, they have significant advantages, such as less restrictive assumptions regarding residuals, high accuracy, little pre-processing, no transformations and capability to define the variable importance (Hastie et al., 2001; Ellis et al., 2012; Pitcher et al., 2012). In addition, these methods can be utilized to recognize the effects on individual taxa and the impact of explanatory variables (e.g. Hastie et al., 2001; Ouedraogo et al., 2019). These approaches have been extensively used in the fields of computer vision (Xu and Jelinek, 2004), medical (Svetnik et al., 2003), bioinformatics (Cutler and Stevens, 2006), terrestrial ecology (Prasad et al., 2006) and marine ecology (Wei et al., 2010; Pitcher et al., 2012; Roubeix et al., 2017). However, this modeling approach has not been applied to benthic foraminiferal data for examining important predictors and thresholds, and the current research represents the first attempt to use machine learning to identify the effects of physical and chemical variables on benthic foraminifera.

Given the importance of foraminifera as environmental indicators, and the power of machine learning approaches, the aims of this study are: 1) to identify which environmental variables have the highest influence on benthic foraminiferal composition and which species are most influenced by these changes, 2) to define the critical values along the most important environmental variables that turn into a compositional change, and 3) to discriminate which environmental variables have the highest influence on selected foraminiferal ecological indices and to quantify ecological thresholds as well as the magnitude of index responses in a coastal area of the central Adriatic Sea.


## 2. Study area and sampling stations

The Adriatic Sea, located between the Italian Peninsula and the Balkan Region, is an elongated basin (about 800 km long and 200 km wide) oriented NW/SE, and is connected to the Mediterranean Sea through the Otranto Strait (Spagnoli et al., 2021). The general circulation of the Adriatic Sea is cyclonic and characterized by local cyclonic gyres where, the sub-gyre of the middle Adriatic is enhanced in summer and autumn. Although the Adriatic Sea is a low nutrient system, the input of organic matter from the Po River and many smaller Apennine rivers, particularly in the northern part of the basin, increases the nutrient budget.

Our study area is located in the central part of the western Adriatic Sea, adjacent to the southern part of the Marche Region, from 7 to 46 m of depth. The main watersheds in the area include the Chienti, Tenna, Aso and Tronto rivers (Fig. 1). Geologic formations, where these rivers drain, mostly range from Miocene to Holocene sediments within limestone, clay and conglomerate (Spagnoli et al., 2021). Present bottom sediment in the northern and central Adriatic Sea are the result of the integration of the solids inputs coming from the Po and Apennine rivers and the general cyclonic Adriatic Sea circulation. This distributes the sediments in a belt parallel to the coastline ranging from sand, inshore, to clay, offshore, while in the center of the basin the relict sediments due to the last transgression outcrop. Due to strong autumn and winter storms, the coastal area is affected by intensive bottom sediment resuspension. Main pollution sources in the study area derive from the Po River fine sediments coming from the northern and by the inputs of the local rivers that drains high industrialized and populated areas (Droghini et al., 2019).


## 3. Material and methods

### 3.1. Sampling and environmental characterization
Sediment samples were collected by a box-corer (sizes 10 l × 17 w × 25 d cm) utilizing a grid of 64 stations located in front of the Southern Marche Region coast, from shoreline to offshore. These samples were collected during the CASE1 cruise, in April 2010 organized by the CNR-ISMAR of Ancona on the M/N G. Dallaporta (Italy). For the aims of present research, only 32 samples have been considered. Each sediment sample was split in aliquots immediately after the sub-sampling for the various analyses. A detailed description of the methodological approach for grain-size, organic and inorganic geochemical analyses are reported in Spagnoli et al. (2021).


### 3.2. Benthic foraminiferal analyses

Samples for benthic foraminiferal analyses were immediately treated with a rose Bengal dye solution (2 g of rose Bengal in 1000 ml of ethyl alcohol) to distinguish between living and dead foraminifera. Samples were dried at 50 °C for 24 h, weighed, then gently washed with tap water through a 63 μm sieve to remove clay, silt and any excess dye. The residual fraction was dried again at 50 °C for 24 h and weighed. Where possible, about three hundred living specimens were picked from the >63 μm fraction and taxonomically classified following Jorissen (1988), Cimerman and Langer (1991) and Fiorini and Vaiani (2001). Several foraminiferal-based biotic indices have been calculated, including exp(H'bc) - an unbiased entropy measure of diversity (Bouchet et al., 2012), Foram Stress Index (FSI, Dimiza et al., 2016), Tolerant Species Index (TSI, Barras et al., 2014) and Foram-AMBI (e.g. Jorissen et al., 2018; Bouchet et al., 2021). FSI, TSI and Foram-AMBI are based on the different responses of foraminiferal species to sensitivity/tolerance to pollution gradients. Foraminiferal species were assigned to ecological groups (details in El Kateb et al., 2020, and references therein). For Foram-AMBI, we used the assignment list of ecological groups provided by Jorissen et al. (2018).


## 3.3. Statistical analyses
### 3.3.1. Random forest

The Rf modeling is an ensemble machine learning approach that is formed by building numerous decision trees (Breiman, 2001). This algorithm introduced by Breiman (2001) used bootstrap aggregating and random subspace approaches to create a set of decision trees. Rf models normally have higher accuracy than other machine learning approaches due to the combination of many trees instead of single constituent model (e.g., Ouedraogo et al., 2019). Rf models create IncNodePurity, an indication of decrease in node impurities across all trees, measured by the Gini Index. Larger IncNodePurity values can be used to assess the importance of different predictor variables. To run the Rf model, two parameters, namely the number of variables randomly collected at each split (mtry) and the number of trees built in our model (ntree) were defined. Here we used between 500 and 5000 trees with mtry = 4 for our 13 exploratory (i.e., environmental) variables. Breiman (2001) showed that with growing the number of trees generalization error continuously converges, thus overfitting is not a problem in this algorithm. The advantage of this approach compared to other models is that it can handle high number of interactions among different independent variables and multi-collinearity is not an issue (Breiman, 2001; Ouedraogo et al., 2019). In addition, Rf methods allow for evaluation of the influence of all environmental variables at once, providing a clear rank of the importance of environmental variables that influence the ecological indices (Ouedraogo et al., 2019). Here, the ‘randomforest’ package and R version of 3.6.4 are used for all of our modeling (Breiman et al., 2006).

### 3.3.2. Gradient forest

Gf, which is a multivariate extension of Rf (Ellis et al., 2012) with multiple predictor and response variables, was used to explore the non-linear response of the benthic foraminiferal community to environmental gradients and to identify which environmental variables have the highest effect on the distribution of these organisms. In this method, for each species the specific importance of each environmental variable was calculated to provide an appropriate ranking value among the selected variables. The overall performance of Gf is evaluated by using the proportion of out of bag data error (a method to evaluate the prediction error of Gf and weighting that variance over all benthic foraminiferal species). The outcomes are presented emphasizing the overall conditional importance of the environmental variables in cumulative importance curves. For analyzing the data by Gf the R software (3.6.4 version) and two packages of “extended-Forest” and “gradient Forest” (Ellis et al., 2012) were used. From this analysis, 2000 trees were created to identify and rank the important predictor variables.


## 4. Discussion:

### 4.1. Impact of environmental variables on distribution of benthic foraminiferal composition

Previous studies on benthic foraminifera have identified a set of environmental variables such as salinity, grain-size, organic matter, oxygen concentration, and trace elements as some of the most important factors shaping the distribution of benthic foraminiferal assemblages in coastal areas (e.g. Donnici et al., 2012; Francescangeli et al., 2017; Armynot du Chatelet et al., 2018). In this study, based on the Gf approach, we conclude that sediment grain size (i.e., sand and silt) is a primary environmental driver structuring benthic foraminiferal assemblages, while anthropogenic pressures (i.e., PLI, TN and TOC) are secondary drivers in the studied coastal area. Similarly, in the Elbe Estuary (Northern Germany), the sediment composition constitutes a controlling factor for the distribution of benthic foraminifera (Francescangeli et al., 2021). Samples with a mean grain-size >300 μm were almost devoid of benthic foraminifera. The significant effect of the grain size in influencing the spatial distribution of benthic foraminifera in this area reflects the sedimentary inputs of local rivers including Chienti and Tronto, and the action of longshore drift currents and waves in the distribution of different grain-size fractions (Spagnoli et al., 2014, 2021). The lower influence of PLI and TOC compared to the grain size can be ascribed by the characteristics of the study sites, which can be considered as low polluted (Spagnoli et al., 2021). Accordingly, on the basis of an extensive geochemical analysis in the area, Spagnoli et al. (2021) reported a mean and max PLI values of 0.7 and 1.1, respectively as well as the modified degree of contamination (mCd) index values constantly below the threshold of 1.5, so all sample sites could be considered from un-to very low polluted. In addition, the effect of the grain size on dissolved oxygen and TOC concentration in the sediments have been described by previous works as the most important limiting factors on the distribution of benthic foraminifera (e.g. Murray, 2001; Barbieri et al., 2019). Our results show that from the coastal area, where sediment is coarser, to the deeper stations characterized by fine sediments (silty-clay), the amount of TOC increases whereas oxygen decreases (as it can be deduced by the decline of the Eh values in deeper areas). The prevalence of calm hydrodynamic conditions allows for the accumulation of fine-grained sediment with cohesive characteristics (difficult to remobilize) and acts as the main controlling factor on the amount of food bound to muddy particles and oxygen availability within the substrate pore water. Here, the Gf model highlights similar thresholds for multiple species in response to sediment grain size gradient (silt, sand, and clay).

In particular, several silt fraction thresholds at 27%, 47%, and 51% have been identified and related to change in abundance of A. parkinsoniana, B. striatula and H. germanica among other species. These results are comparable to previous studies that found relatively high abundance of these species in muddy sediments (with low amount of sand fraction), and allowed for the verification that these species in general thrive in environments with relatively high organic matter availability (i.e., Van der Zwaan et al., 1999; Eichler et al., 2003). For instance, along the Northern France coastal areas, the relative abundance of H. germanica rapidly declines with the increase of the sandy fraction (Francescangeli et al., 2020).

PLI, the third most important factor affecting the distribution of benthic foraminifera, showed a strong negative correlation with sand variables and strong positive correlation with clay and silt. . Therefore, despite the fact that sources of pollution at this site are from land, the concentrations of potentially toxic elements (expressed by higher values of PLI) tend to increase where calm hydrodynamic conditions allow for the accumulation of fine-grained sediments also enriched in organic matter. Such conditions occur in the study site at deeper areas. These results indicate that the PLI value is higher in mud and TOC enriched sediments than in the coarser ones (i.e., sandy substrates), as expected, since trace elements have high affinity with clay particles and organic materials, which have high capabilities of absorbing and retaining trace elements (Horowitz, 1991; Warren and Haack, 2001; Martins et al., 2015). Threshold responses for both B. marginata and B. elongata species show a significant change with an increase of PLI values and sand fraction. Previous studies observed that these species thrive in fine-grained sediments with high organic matter content and low dissolved oxygen contents, since they are opportunistic and can tolerate oxygen depletion (e.g., Murray, 1991b; Jorissen et al., 1992; Van der Zwaan et al., 1999; Mojtahid et al., 2006). The ecological attributes of these species support our result, showing a significant decline in abundance with small increase of sand fraction in the shore area (Magno et al., 2012). It is also possible that these species have a preference for high quality organic matter produced in the marine water column and do not benefit so much from more degraded organic matter (i.e., refractory) that is from continental sources (Magno et al., 2012). On the other hand, the instability of the substrate caused by frequent remobilization by the waves action or burial in areas of rapid deposition of sediment in shallower regions are factors unfavorable to the success of these species, as observed by Martins et al. (2019).

In spite of using a large number of predictive variables, our Gf model predicted the distribution and compositional change of the 12 species out of 26 in the study area. These results suggest that the species distribution is based partly on the analyzed parameters, however the explained variance would likely be improved if other factors were added, including marine productivity, salinity, temperature, hydrographic and hydrodynamic conditions (e.g. tides, recurrence and intensity changes in upwelling/downwelling pattern, rip currents), ocean circulation, quality of particulate organic matter, competition/cooperation with other species, and abundance of other meiofaunal groups that feed on foraminifera or change locally the environmental characteristics through its activity.


## 4.2. Benthic foraminiferal ecological quality indices

We evaluated the effect of environmental gradients on foraminiferal-based biotic indices, namely exp(H'bc), FSI, TSI and Foram-AMBI in the present coastal area. With increasing urbanization, industrialization, and other environmental stress condition, finding a way to identify the environmental quality and monitoring the distribution of species has become a priority. Based on the previous studies, these indices have been associated with organic matter content, pollution and oxygen availability (e.g., Bouchet et al., 2012; Hutton et al., 2015; Dimiza et al., 2016; Jorissen et al., 2018; Frontalini et al., 2020).

The exp(H'bc) has been identified as a promising tool to estimate the EcoQS (Bouchet et al., 2012). It was introduced to monitor the EcoQS of Norwegian Fjords as it showed a strong link between the benthic foraminiferal diversity and the bottom water oxygenation, reflecting the ecological conditions. This index was successfully applied along the transitional areas of Italian peninsula (Bouchet et al., 2018; Melis et al., 2019; Cavaliere et al., 2021) and was also used to reconstruct the Paleo-EcoQS in polluted harbors (Francescangeli et al., 2016; dos S. de Jesus et al., 2020). Our approach suggests that near the coast and at northern stations, this index shows a marked decline that is consistent with previous studies on diversity indices in the Adriatic Sea (i.e., Frontalini and Coccioni, 2008; Semprucci et al., 2013). Our results show that two main components, the grain-size (silt) and the quality of organic matter (δ13C), influence the exp(H'bc). In particular, using partial plot, we document a major change in this index when silt is higher than 26%. The influence of silt can be explained by the fact that this index is sensitive to faunal density (i.e. the number of individuals in a target sediment volume), which is often higher in muddy sediment. It has been proven indeed, that when the number of specimens is lower than 100, the species diversity patterns may be biased (e.g. Fatela et al., 2002). In addition, our data show that when δ13C is higher than −24.3‰, we observed a substantial increase in exp(H'bc). A tendency towards higher (i.e. less negative) values of δ13C can be translated as higher availability of fresh inputs (labile organic matter) (e.g. Meyers, 1997), increasing the diversity of benthic organisms. In this case, the less negative values of δ13C represent a greater contribution from oceanic organic matter sources. Our results show that silt is an important predictor of exp(H'bc) and confirm the usefulness of this index as a measure of in situ ecological conditions. In coastal areas, indeed, metal contaminants, organic enrichments, and oxygen deficiencies often occur in fine-grained sediments (e.g. Armynot du Chatelet et al., 2018; El Kateb et al., 2020). However, diversity can be linked to other variables, such as quality of organic matter, which can be indirectly related to human-related environmental stress or to natural processes related to the introduction and distribution of organic materials of continental origin into the sea and hydrodynamic conditions that allow for their accumulation.

The FSI, TSI and Foram-AMBI have been recently introduced as monitoring tool for evaluating the ecological quality status of marine ecosystems (e.g. Dimiza et al., 2016; Barras et al., 2014; Bouchet et al., 2021). These indices are based on the relative abundance of sensitive versus tolerant species to environmental stress. On the basis of our analysis these indices seem to be influenced by grain-size (i.e., silt and sand), δ13C and metal pollution (i.e. PLI). These three indices show similar major changes for silt values of about 30% as well as similar tendencies against grain-size (i.e., sand and clay) and PLI. This demonstrates a similar trend of these indices in coastal environments. In these environments, opportunistic/stress tolerant benthic foraminiferal species are dominant in fine sediments (e.g., Alve et al., 2016; Jorissen et al., 2018). The highest values of TSI and Foram-AMBI and the lowest of FSI occur at stations with high amount of silt and clay, that are indeed associated with higher values of TOC and PLI. These variables are, in general, influenced by hydrodynamics and sedimentary dynamics, which are reflected in a certain way in the textural parameters of the sediment. This set of evidences well supports previous studies showing the usefulness of these indices as an indicator of sediment quality (i.e., Damak et al., 2020; El Kateb et al., 2020; Parent et al., 2021). Based on the FSI, TSI and Foram-AMBI, it is clear that negative impacts on foraminiferal communities are greatest at stations far from the coast that are characterized by relatively finer substrates (i.e., silt and clay) influenced by the fluvial inputs and longshore transport of sediments. Our results suggest than when there is no strong gradient of organic matter and trace metal contaminations, as the case in this portion of the Adriatic Sea, the grain-size plays a major role in the determination of sediment quality based on benthic foraminifera.

The modelling approach carried out in this work allows us to better understand the influence that various types of stressors can have on benthic communities of meiofaunal organisms. This approach can prompt management action, and also help to understand the dynamics of ecosystems, restoration of different marine species, and quantification of the effect of biological, chemical, and physical variables on benthic foraminifera in an ecosystem. It is worth noting the direct and indirect impacts of climate change, which are expected to re-shape coastal marine communities in the near future. Understanding of the present-day biotic-abiotic relationships and the relative thresholds is required to estimate the yet unknown resilience of recent faunas to substantial climate change, and to assess the impact of global change on their distribution. Our results and broader applications of these approaches should be helpful for policymakers to understand the diversity of marine organisms and to improve efforts to protect and restore marine ecosystems by identifying environmental drivers and their thresholds.


## 5. Conclusions

Studying variation in benthic foraminiferal communities along environmental gradients is an integral part of understanding the distributional pattern of these organisms. Our study determined the main environmental variables responsible for changes in the compositional pattern of benthic foraminiferal community and the ecological indices used for the determination of the EcoQS indices. By using Gf modeling, the variation in benthic foraminiferal species composition was mostly attributed to change in grain size distribution, but different species showed dissimilar response to different environmental variables. The benthic foraminiferal species in the deeper stations are predominantly controlled by fine substrate, organic matter and PLI values. Machine learning methods can serve as a useful tool to define ecological thresholds for species assemblages and should be used more frequently to evaluate the effects of different environmental variables on benthic foraminiferal species and other biological organisms. Applications of these approaches can be a useful tool for policymakers to survey the change in diversity and ecological indices and to improve the ability to protect and restore marine ecosystems by identifying environmental drivers and defining their thresholds.
